# **Lighthouse**
This is the GitHub repository for VA's Lighthouse program. 

# Background
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has clearly been at the forefront of conceptualizing, developing and adopting a variety of innovative services and technologies related to care delivery for many decades. No investment is clearer on this point than that made by the VA for last four decades related to information technology. The use of health information technology (health IT) has been a foundational element of care delivery within VA since 1977, when it made a commitment to employ the use of an electronic health record as a key component for care delivery. At the time, there were no commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) systems and the involvement of clinicians in the design of such systems was uncommon. However, VA made the decision to invest in the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA), which helped lead the health care industry forward in the use of information technology.

Today, we have seen how legacy EHR systems have brought improvements in quality, efficiency, and safety to healthcare. Simply moving from a paper-based setting to one digitally enabled with interconnected hospital departments and ubiquitous record access within facilities has driven healthcare delivery to new levels. While VistA represented a leading-edge service and product during the formative years of its use, much of the information technology field has evolved exponentially through the adoption of more advanced technology. As we have witnessed in other sectors, there is an opportunity – even a responsibility – to bring current technologies that are used broadly today by virtually every other industry to Veteran healthcare. Other industries have leveraged this modern digital landscape to exponentially create new ways in how we live and work from banking and shopping to travel and communication, robustly affecting almost every aspect of life – with healthcare impacts lagging behind.

In order to bring similar revolutionary changes to Veteran healthcare – chronic care management, preventive care, care coordination, personalized therapies, and remote care delivery – we need even smarter communication tools, information systems, patient-facing applications, and predictive analytics. We also need to foster a culture and environment that attracts inventive companies and developers that can build even better solutions going forward. This kind of innovative ecosystem requires a digital platform strategy leveraging open application programming interfaces (APIs) to fully support healthcare interoperability and the next generation of care for Veterans. 

The central nervous system to VA’s digital transformation strategy is leveraging a strategic open API program called Lighthouse that adopts an outside-in, value-to-business driven approach to create API’s that are managed as products to be consumed by developers internal and external to VA. Such an approach serves as a change catalyst that will allow VA to decouple systems and continue to leverage its investment in various digital assets, support application rationalization and allow it to absorb new, commercial software-as-a-solution (SaaS) to replace homegrown, outdated systems. This strategy calls for a clearly defined operating model for managing the complete life cycle of API’s and will include the planning, design, implementation, publication, maintenance, and retirement of APIs as well the operation of the API Gateway platform on a VA private cloud. 

The API Gateway leverages Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) so as to enable enhanced data interoperability between both internal and external systems. API enabled and FHIR based solutions are easier for developers to implement as it makes use of modern web standards and RESTful architectures with more easily understood specifications. By liberating data and enhancing interoperability with FHIR, VA will be able to shift ownership of the data to Veterans and make that data more readily available for whom it is necessary. Additionally, these resources will allow for more powerful solutions to be developed which will allow for a more seamless patient and provider experience.

Typically, VA has maintained a closed systems approach with too many focused resources and inability to absorb more innovative technologies or data sources making it difficult to dramatically impact the patient and provider experiences. By following the lead of other industries, this new approach demonstrates that leveraging emerging technologies such as FHIR or other accepted industry open standards can provide a more flexible and reusable framework. This will provide our organization with a foundation where resources can come together — sometimes very quickly and temporarily, sometimes in a relatively fixed way — to create value. Some resources may be inside, permanently owned by the organization; some will be shared; and some can come from outside. The value largely comes from connecting the resources, and the network effects between them. 

We will also be able to effectively shift technology development to commercial EHR and administrative systems vendors that can integrate modular components into the enterprise through open API’s. This will allow VA to leverage these capabilities to adopt more efficient and effective care management processes while fostering an interoperable, active, and innovative ecosystem of solutions and services through its open API framework. This will enable the next generation of healthy living and care models that are more precise, personalized, outcome-based, evidence-based, tiered and connected across the continuum of care regardless of where and how care is delivered. This API-enabled, open and accessible platform can be used not only for Veterans’ care but also for advanced knowledge sharing, clinical decision support, technical expertise, and process interoperability with organizations throughout the U.S. care delivery system. 

We look forward to partnering with the healthcare industry and welcome any guidance or suggestions as healthcare is at a critical point of transformation that requires the reassessment and redeployment of resources in new, innovative ways to more effectively meet the needs of society.
